# SAT Solver

This is for running the SAT solver on a simple demo example

## Copyright

<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line MD033 -->
<legal>  
Pointer Ownership Model (POM) Source Code Release  
  
Copyright 2025 Carnegie Mellon University.  
  
NO WARRANTY. THIS CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING  
INSTITUTE MATERIAL IS FURNISHED ON AN "AS-IS" BASIS. CARNEGIE MELLON  
UNIVERSITY MAKES NO WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR  
IMPLIED, AS TO ANY MATTER INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, WARRANTY OF  
FITNESS FOR PURPOSE OR MERCHANTABILITY, EXCLUSIVITY, OR RESULTS  
OBTAINED FROM USE OF THE MATERIAL. CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY DOES NOT  
MAKE ANY WARRANTY OF ANY KIND WITH RESPECT TO FREEDOM FROM PATENT,  
TRADEMARK, OR COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT.  
  
Licensed under a MIT (SEI)-style license, please see license.txt or  
contact permission@sei.cmu.edu for full terms.  
  
[DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A] This material has been approved for public  
release and unlimited distribution.  Please see Copyright notice for  
non-US Government use and distribution.  
  
DM25-1262  
</legal>  


## Demo of basic use

```
cd /host/src/constraint_gen
./compile_to_ll.sh ../test/swap.c -o swap.ll  # produces the LLVM IR file
./run.sh swap.ll out # runs the constraint generator and the SAT solver
```

## Files in output directory

- `<input_file>.ssa.ll`: The result of running `VarStorePass` and `mem2reg` (in that order) on the input ".ll" file.
- `numbered_ir.txt`: In the `constraints.txt` file, you may see things like `foo.c_L13c5_I7-pre`; the `I7` is a label of LLVM IR instruction, and this file indicates the labels of the LLVM IR instructions.
- `constraints.txt`: The constraints generated in the ConstraintGen pass.
- `constraints.dimacs`: The constraints from the above file **for a particular function** (unless using `FUNC="__all_funcs"`), converted to DIMACS format.
- `var_map.json`: The mapping between the numeric variable IDs used in `constraints.dimacs` and the named variables used in `constraints.txt`.

If the constraints are satisfiable:
- `solution.json`: Assignment of `true` or `false` to each of the named variables appearing in `constraints.txt`.
- `solution.txt`: Raw output from SAT Solver, using numeric variable IDs.

If the constraints are unsatisfiable, the following files are generated by `get_unsat_core.sh`, described in the next section.
- proof.drat: A proof of unsatisfiability.
- core.unsat: The subset of clauses from `constraints.dimacs` that are used in the above proof.
- core.unsat.named: Same as core.unsat, except using descriptive variable names instead of numeric variable IDs.


## SAT terminology

- A SAT solver takes a logical formula involving boolean variables and decides whether there is assignment to the boolean variables the satisfy the formula. ("Satisfy a formula" means "make the formula evaluate to TRUE".)
- A literal is a boolean variable or its negation.  E.g., given a boolean variable `x`, both `x` and `!x` are literals.  In constraints.txt, "!" is used for logical negation.  In DIMACS, "-" is used.
- A clause is a disjunction of literals.  In constraints.txt, "|" is used to denote logical disjunction.  E.g., `x | y` is a clause that is true if `x` is true or `y` is true.
- A formula is Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF) if it is the conjunction of clauses.


## Demo of getting an unsat core

The following commands should be run from within the POM Docker container:

``` bash
cd /host/src/constraint_gen
./compile_to_ll.sh ../test/join_good_zombie.c -o join_good_zombie.ll
./run.sh join_good_zombie.ll out
cryptominisat out/constraints.dimacs out/proof.drat
/opt/drat-trim/drat-trim out/constraints.dimacs out/proof.drat -c out/core.unsat
python3 conv_dimacs.py --from-dimacs out/core.unsat -o out/core.unsat.named -v out/var_map.json --clause-info-file out/constraints.txt
```

At this point the `out/core.unsat.named` file contains the unsat core. This is a Boolean logical contradiction, which proves that the program cannot be satisfied by any p-model; it is POM-noncompliant.  The core is in conjunctive normal form (CNF), where each line should be considered to be joined with other lines by 'and'. (eg line 1 and line 2 and ...).  Each line ends with a comment describing what each constraint is derived from.

Now there is also a Bash script that does the above sequence commands (except the `./compile_to_ll`):

`./get_unsat_core.sh join_good_zombie.ll`

You can also give the command-line flag `--collapse-flow` to `./get_unsat_core.sh`.  This will collapse a long sequence like
```
good(x, time1) -> good(x, time2)
good(x, time2) -> good(x, time3)
good(x, time3) -> good(x, time4)
```
to
```
good(x, time1) -> good(x, time4)
```
if the intermediate variables (`good(x, time2)` and `good(x, time3)` here) are not used anywhere else in the UNSAT core.

## Environment variables
- `POM_FILE`: the ".pom.yml" file.
- `FUNC`: name of function to be analyzed, or `__all_funcs` to analyze all functions together (whole-program mode).
- `LLVM_OPTS`: arguments passed to ConstraintGenPass.  Do `grep -C 3 'cl::opt' ConstraintGenPass.cpp` to find all options.
- `POM_YAML_LOCALS`: whether `pom_yaml_to_props.py` should process the local variables in the ".pom.yml" file.  (Note the variable shadowing currently may cause spurious contradictory constraints.)


## Demo of using a `.pom.yml` file

Command without POM file ("-no-mem-leak" prevents checking for memory leaks):
```
./compile_to_ll.sh ../test/print_and_free.c -o print_and_free.ll
LLVM_OPTS="-no-mem-leak" FUNC=main ./run.sh print_and_free.ll out | tail -n 2
```
Output:
```
SATISFIABLE
Solution written to out/solution.json
```

Command with POM file:
```
POM_FILE="../test/print_and_free.pom.yml" LLVM_OPTS="-no-mem-leak" FUNC=main ./get_unsat_core.sh print_and_free.ll -o out
```

The output will be a set of clauses.  You can further run `./examine_core.py out/core.unsat.named`.  This will do unit propagation and indicate which clause forces which literal and which clause ends up falsified.  (In most cases, unit prop alone is sufficient to reach a conflict; in cases where it isn't, `examine_core.py` isn't very helpful.)  Note that clauses are prioritized to try to generate sensible output.


## Argument indices and names for standard-library functions

Use `--arg-name-file <argnames.txt>` with `./pom_yaml_to_props.py` to produce a `argnames.txt` file, and then use `--arg-name-file <argnames.txt>` with ConstraintGenPass to use the `argnames.txt` file.

Example usage:
```
./pom_yaml_to_props.py ../test/test.famous.llm.pom.yml -o /dev/null --arg-name-file test.famous.argnames.txt
./compile_to_ll.sh ../test/swap.c -o ../test/swap.raw.ll
QUIET_MINISAT=true LLVM_OPTS="-arg-name-file test.famous.argnames.txt -whole-prog" ./run.sh ../test/swap.raw.ll out
```

It should say "Parsed argument names for N functions." and no longer say "Warning: an argument of function printf is missing a name.".

Note that `run.sh` and `run_solver.py` both do this internally when given a ".pom.yml" file; it isn't a step that you need to do manually.  Example:
```
./compile_to_ll.sh ../test/swap.c -o ../test/swap.raw.ll
QUIET_MINISAT=true POM_FILE="../test/test.famous.llm.pom.yml ../test/swap.pom.yml" ./run.sh ../test/swap.raw.ll out
```
(Note that you can include multiple files, separated by whitespace, in the `POM_FILE` environment variable.)


## Demo of summarizing a function

First, need to build GhostQ:
```
cd ghostq
make
cd ..
```

Example with swap.c:
```
./compile_to_ll.sh ../test/swap.c -o swap.ll
LLVM_OPTS="--no-check-null" ./summarize_func.sh swap.ll out
```

The ouput of the above command will look something like the following:
```
and(-zombie<arg.p_@_start>, -zombie<arg.q_@_start>, 
  ite(responsible<arg.p>, 
    ite(responsible<*arg.p>, and(responsible<*arg.q>, responsible<arg.q>), 
      -responsible<*arg.q>), 
    and(-responsible<*arg.q>, -responsible<*arg.p>)))
```

Above, "ite" means "if-then-else".  In particular, `ite(x, y, z)` means "if x then y else z" (in C syntax: `x ? y : z`); it is logically equivalent to "(x ∧ y) ∨ (¬x ∧ z)".

You alter the order in which the boolean variables are branched on by converting to a BDD with a specified variable ordering, as shown below.  (You need to create the file `ghostq/bdd-order.txt` before the running the command.)

Command: `LLVM_OPTS="--no-check-null" ./summarize_func.sh swap.ll out | ghostq/fmla - -bdd-simp -bdd-order ghostq/bdd-order.txt`

File `bdd-order.txt`:
```
[
zombie<arg.p_@_start>,
zombie<arg.q_@_start>,
responsible<arg.p>,
responsible<arg.q>,
]
```

Output:
```
and(-zombie<arg.p_@_start>, -zombie<arg.q_@_start>, 
  ite(responsible<arg.p>, 
    ite(responsible<arg.q>, 
      ite(responsible<*arg.p>, responsible<*arg.q>, -responsible<*arg.q>), 
      $5:and(-responsible<*arg.p>, -responsible<*arg.q>)), 
    $5))
```
The subformula labeled by `$5` occurs twice in the output.  On the first occurrence, it is labelled with `$5`, and for the second occurrence, just the label is used, to avoid repeating the whole subformula.  That is, the above output is equivalent to:
```
and(-zombie<arg.p_@_start>, -zombie<arg.q_@_start>, 
  ite(responsible<arg.p>, 
    ite(responsible<arg.q>, 
      ite(responsible<*arg.p>, responsible<*arg.q>, -responsible<*arg.q>), 
      and(-responsible<*arg.p>, -responsible<*arg.q>)), 
    and(-responsible<*arg.p>, -responsible<*arg.q>)))
```

A POM YAML file can also be supplied, like as follows:
```
POM_FILE=../test/swap.pom.yml LLVM_OPTS="--no-check-null" ./summarize_func.sh swap.ll out
```

Output:
```
and(-zombie<arg.p_@_start>, responsible<*arg.p>, -zombie<arg.q_@_start>,
  responsible<*arg.q>, responsible<arg.p>, responsible<arg.q>)
```

Although we currently don't have plans to use the generated function summaries in production (as we're using the ".pom.yml" files instead), they have been quite helpful in testing and debugging the constraint generator.

## Helper scripts `run_solver.py` and `run.sh`

You can run the SAT-solver based verifier using `run_solver.py` or `run.sh`, both of which run the constraint solver and the SAT-solver.

Optionally, input can include p-model files, as discussed in the top-level README.md's Section [Running the p-model Builder](../../README.md#running-the-p-model-builder). The schema used by the p-model files is formally specified in [pom.yamale.yml](../pom.yamale.yml).

The constraint generator takes exactly one LLVM IR file as input. You can use [llvm-link](https://llvm.org/docs/CommandGuide/llvm-link.html) to produce a combined file (use the clang version as `$CLANG_VER` in the following command, e.g., `llvm-link-15`):

`llvm-link-$CLANG_VER input_1.raw.ll input_2.raw.ll ... input_N.raw.ll -S -o combined.raw.ll`

[run_solver.py](../run_solver.py) automatically does the `llvm-link` step if you have multiple `.ll` files.

Run the verifier step using [run_solver.py](../run_solver.py) or [run.sh](./run.sh). [run_solver.py](../run_solver.py) iterates through all of the functions and analyzes each function separately and reports SAT or UNSAT for each function. In contrast, [run.sh](./run.sh) inputs one `.ll` file and analyzes either just a single function or the whole program in whole-program mode. To run the constraint generator in whole-program mode, set the `LLVM_OPTS` environment variable to that, e.g.: `export LLVM_OPTS="-whole-prog"`.

As input, `run_solver.py` takes one or more `.ll` files, plus optional arguments including the p-model for the codebase, library function p-models, an output directory, a clang version (e.g., `18`), and whether to output results in JSON format.

Command-line arguments to `run.sh` consist of a single `.ll` file and optionally the output directory (defaults to "out" in the current directory). One or more ".pom.yml" files (which specify p-models of functions) can be provided via the `POM_FILE` environment variable. (Multiple ".pom.yml" files can specified like this: `POM_FILE="file_1.pom.yml file_2.pom.yml ... file_N.pom.yml"`.) The environment variable `FUNC` specifies which function to analyze; the default is to analyze all functions.

## The demos above and `make_run_clang`

The demo examples here differ from some other POM documentation and presentations which show the POM build step calling `make_run_clang.py`. These demo examples start by calling `compile_to_ll.sh`: This compiles the single `.c` file example into `.ll` (LLVM IR), accomplishing that aspect of the build step. Although the `compile_to_ll.sh` script uses some extra arguments to clang (`ggdb` and `-fexperimental-assignment-tracking=enabled`), those do not change the output compared to running clang with arguments provided by `make_run_clang.py`.

## Detail about the dos2unix SAT-solver verifier example

The [top-level README.md](../../README.md) provides another SAT-solver verifier example, for dos2unix. Some details not discussed there are provided here.

Note: dos2unix uses the POSIX library function `dirname` on POSIX builds but defines its own `dirname` function for Windows builds. We use the p-model for POSIX library function `dirname` in `dos2unix.famous.manual.pom.yml`. Separately, we use the p-model for the dos2unix custom `dirname` function (that is only active on the Windows configuration of dos2unix) in `dos2unix.manual.pom.yml`.

## Borrow design

The borrow design (work in progress) is described [here](./borrow_design.txt).
